Project 2
GSD VIS 2478
Intangible Design: Organizations
Project-Based Seminar
Organizational Architectures
“You have to start from what is.”1
Project two expands the personal, subjective perspective of project one onto the systemic,
organizational scale. The present project is about obtaining and using quantitative data, then
complementing that data with your own first-hand observations and interactions on campus.
Project two is not merely interrogating facts – you will transition from exploration to advancing
a hypothesis or a question about the organization and ultimately present your findings visually!
This study can be, but does not have to be, the launch of project three, which will be about
change and the related models and visuals.
As you choose your focus (the ‘site’) for project two please consider some of the known and
interrelated ‘big challenges’ the University faces:
- Interdisciplinarity: There is a tension between the fairly siloed academic units at the
University vis-a vis a connected world in which societal problems are no longer addressed
solely in the disciplines, but by working across the disciplines.
- Fiscal sustainability and credibility: the cost of higher education in general is increasingly
out of reach for many potential students, while the perception of the value that higher
education provides is being challenged.
- Credibility: The University is encountering challenges on how to convey Harvard’s
contribution to the benefit of society.
Feel free to choose your focus with another challenge in mind – these are simply suggestions!
Groups: Please form a group of 3 students (there might be one group of four or two students,
depending on final enrollment numbers). Please consider working with someone you do not
know, from another program or another unit of the University. Use the Google Sheet to
1 Sobek, W., & Heinlein, F. (2022). Non nobis: über das Bauen in der Zukunft. Avedition.
1
Project 2
facilitate identifying shared interests and form groups. The instructor and TAs are happy to help
and reserve the right to intervene!
The Site: Work with you group (e.g. design a process for this step!) and choose a ‘site’ for your
project – not a physical one, but ‘site’ as an identifiable activity, phenomenon, group, or unit at
Harvard. Keep in mind opportunities that might arise when ‘cutting across’ the various siloed
units (academic, administrative, physical, non-physical) at Harvard as an example of an
extremely decentralized institution. Chances are by doing this for almost any ‘site’ you will find
something that surprises someone, somewhere, on campus. There are a few requirements you
should consider when choosing your ‘site’:
- Availability of data (either data is included in our datasets, is otherwise published, can be
scraped or obtained in other legal ways).
- Ability to investigate ‘firsthand’ by talking, interviewing, observing, documenting in some
form or other.
- Compliance with policies and the GSD’s community values.
- Relevance: make sure your ‘site’ is relevant to a respectable number of stakeholders (I am
leaving the definition of ‘respectable’ intentionally to your group) and responds to one or
more of the big challenges mentioned earlier on.
Methods: (listed in no particular order)
- Data exploration: conduct some data exploration to understand patterns, trends and other
opportunities for a narrative.
- Deepen data analysis: obtain additional data if needed.
- Conduct field research – talk to ‘site’ stakeholders, conduct a survey, in order to understand the
qualitative aspects of your ‘site’.
- In your visual analysis consider the importance of context and be conscious of any biases that your
group might bring to the investigation.
- Pursue the work on your ‘site’ as a work on systems, with parts and relationships, flows and stocks.
What relationships govern system behavior? What, if any, might be leverage points in the system?
- Consider the system stakeholders, internal and external, and their interrelationships as they pertain
to your site.
Presentation:
Prepare a presentation to an audience for our midterm session on March 9, 2026. We will have 20
minutes for each presentation including discussion, so it is important to be concise and precise while still
fully communicating your work. Your decks (pdf or PPTX only) should include a brief self-introduction of
2
Project 2
your group members. Below are a few additional thoughts to consider in your presentation and your
work:
- What is the current perception of your ‘site’?
- What is the relationship between perception and facts? Are there differences, if so, why do they
exist?
- What did you find that surprised you?
- What findings confirmed your notions about the site?
- To what extent does your site represent a unique situation at Harvard, or a situation that is
common in higher education?
Be mindful when deciding on the design principles / graphic themes of your deck. Please include one
slide on your methods and disclose your use of AI – we hope everyone can learn from each other’s
methods!
version 1
MB, Cambridge, 2/10/2026
Note: By using the datasets provided you agree to the use terms as outlined in the syllabus. Most
importantly you acknowledge that you will not share the datasets outside the class, and that these
datasets may include errors or omissions. You also agree to delete the datasets from your personal
computers or clouds after the current semester ends.
3
